TRANSLATION OF THE GILGIT TEXT
[5a] The Blessed One said: "The number, Subhiiti, of particles of
dust in a world system of three thousand great-thousand worlds1-is
that great?"
He said: "It is great, Blessed One. That particle of dust is said to be
not a particle by the Tathagata. In that sense 'a particle of dust' is used.
Also, that which is a world system, that is said by the Tathagata not to
be a system. In that sense 'world system' is used."
The Blessed One said: "What do you think, Subhuti? Is a Tathagata
to be seen through the thirty-two characteristic marks of a great man?"
He said: "No, Blessed One. Why is that? Each of the thirty-two
characteristic marks of a great man is said to be not a characteristic
mark by the Tathagata. In that sense 'the thirty-two characteristic
marks of a great man' is used."
The Blessed One said: "But again, Subhuti, if a woman or a man
were to give away their person as many times as there are sands in the
river Ganges, and if someone else, after taking from this discourse on
Doctrine a verse of even four lines, were to teach it to others, the latter
alone would on that account produce great merit, immeasurable and
incalculable. "
Then, indeed, the Venerable Subhuti, through the shock of the
Doctrine,2 burst into tears. Wiping away his tears, he said this to the
Blessed One: "It is astonishing, 0 Blessed One, it is truly astonishing, 0
Sugata, how this discourse on Doctrine3 was spoken by the Tathagata, as
a consequence of which knowledge has arisen for me! I have never heard
this discourse on Doctrine before. They, Blessed One, who will produce
a true conception when this sutra is being taught here will be possessed
by the greatest astonishment. And that, Blessed One, which is a true
conception, that indeed is not a conception. On that account the Tathagata
says [5b] 'A true conception, a true conception'.
"Blessed One, it is not astonishing to me that I am prepared for the
teaching of this discourse on Doctrine, since I have been intent upon it.
Blessed One, those living beings who will take up this discourse on
123
I'
I'll
l·
'" '"
,,,
i ,II!
iii ,.,j
ii'!
'''I
:1:1
124 Translation
Doctrine ... 4 and master it will be possessed by the greatest astonishment.
But again, Blessed One, a conception of a self will not occur to
them, nor a conception of a living being, nor a conception of a personal
soul, nor a conception of a person. And why is that? Because the Buddhas,
the Blessed Ones, have walked away from all conceptions."
The Blessed One said: "That is so, Subhiiti. Those who, after hearing
this discourse on Doctrine, will not be terrified, will not tremble, will
not be overcome by dread, they will be possessed by the greatest
astonishment.5 And why is that? This, Subhoti, has been declared by
the Tathagata to be the greatest perfection. And that which the Tathagata
declares the greatest perfection is declared as well by immeasurable
Buddhas and Blessed Ones. In that sense 'greatest perfection' is used.
"But again, Subhoti, that which is the perfection of patience of the
Tathagata, just that is not a perfection. And why is that? When,
SubhOti, an evil kingS hacked the flesh from all my limbs, there was for
me on that occasion no conception of a self, no conception of a living
being, no conception of a personal soul, no conception of a person. Nor,
moreover, could there have been a conception of injury for me at that
time.7 SubhOti, I remember five hundred births in the past when I was a
seer who taught patience. Then too there was for me no conception of a
self, no conception of a living being, no conception of a personal soul, no
conception of a person. Therefore, Subhoti, a bodhisattva, a mahasattva,
having abandoned all conception ... " [folio 6 is missing].
["Those who will take up this discourse on Doctrine, will preserve it,
will declare it, will recite it, will master it ... ],8 [7a] all those living
beings will carry my awakening on their shoulder.9 And why is that? It
is not possible for this discourse on Doctrine to be heard by living beings
who have but little resolve. Nor is it possible for it to be heard, taken up
... or mastered, by those who have a view of a self, nor by those who
have a view of a living being or a personal soul or a person. That situation
simply does not occur.
"But again, Subhoti, on whatever piece of ground one will proclaim
this sOtra, that piece of ground will become an object of worship. That
piece of ground will become for the world together with its devas, men
and asuras a true shrine to be revered and circumambulated.10 Subhoti,
those sons and daughters of good family who will take up sotras such as
these ... and master them, they will be ridiculed, severely ridiculed. But,
through that ridicule, their demeritorious actions in former lives which
should lead to rebirth in an unfortunate destiny will here and now come
to be exhausted, and they will obtain the awakening of a Buddha.ll
"Subhoti, I remember that in the past, during incalculable and more
than incalculable aeons-before the time of the Tathagata, Arhat, Fully
I
I
,I
i
The Gilgit Manuscript of the Vajracchedika 125
and Completely Awakened One D'ipaIhkara-there were eighty-four
hundreds of thousands of millions of billions of Buddhas who were
attended to by me and, having been attended to, were not neglected. [7b]
If, Subhl1ti, after having attended to them, all those Buddhas were not
neglected by me; and if in the Final Period, when the last five hundred
years have begun, someone will take up these sl1tras ... and master
them, then, Subhl1ti, the quantity of merit resulting from the former
does not approach even a hundredth part of the quantity of merit of the
latter, nor a thousandth part, nor a hundred-thousandth. That quantity
of merit is not open to enumeration, nor measure, nor calculation, nor
comparison, nor likening. Subhl1ti, those living beings, those sons and
daughters of good family will acquire then such a quantity of merit that
if I were to declare the quantity of merit of those sons and daughters of
good family, living beings (who heard that declaration) would go mad,
they would be totally disoriented. But again, Subhl1ti, this discourse on
Doctrine is unthinkable-unthinkable indeed is its effect."12
He said: "How, Blessed One, should one who has set out on the way
of a bodhisattva stand? How should he actually practice? How should
he direct his thought?"
The Blessed One said: "Here, Subhl1ti, one who has set out on the
way of a bodhisattva should produce a thought in this manner: 'All living
beings should be led by me to final nirvana in the realm of nirvana which
leaves nothing behind. But after having led living beings thus to final
nirvana, there is no living being whatsoever who has been lead to final
nirvana.' And why is that? If, [8a] Subhl1ti, a conception of a living
being were to occur to a bodhisattva, a conception of a personal soul, or a
conception of a person, he is not to be called 'a bodhisattva'. And why is
that? Subhl1ti, that which is called 'one who has set out on the way of a
bodhisattva', that is not a thing.13
"What do you think, Subhl1ti? Is that some thing which was
awakened to by the Tathagata, in the presence of the Tathagata D'ipaIhkara,
as the utmost, full and perfect awakening?"
He said: "Blessed One, that which was awakened to by the Tathagata,
in the presence of the Tathagata D'ipaIhkara, as the utmost, full
and perfect awakening is not some thing."
He said: "Because of that was I assured by the Tathagata D'ipaIhkara:
'You, young man, will be at a future time a Tathagata, Arhat, Fully
and Perfectly Awakened One named Sakyamuni.' And why is that?
'Tathagata', Subhl1ti, that is a designation for thusness. Subhl1ti,
someone might speak thus, 'The utmost, full and perfect awakening is
fully and perfectly awakened to by the Tathagata.' But that which is the
utmost, full and perfect awakening fully and perfectly awakened to by
..
III
"'1
"
"'1
il
"" ii! :i
1'1':
126 Translation
the Tathiigata is not some thing. Subhiiti, the thing which is fully and
perfectly awakened to by the Tathagata-in that there is neither truth
nor falsehood. On that account the Tathagata says 'all characteristics
are the characteristics of a Buddha.' 'All characteristics', Subhuti, all
those are not characteristics. In that sense 'all characteristics' is used.
Suppose for example, Subhuti, there would be a man endowed with a
body, a great body."
Subhuti said: "That which [8b] the Tathiigata has called a man
endowed with a body, a great body-he, Blessed One, is said to be without
a body by the Tathagata. In that sense 'endowed with a body, a great
body' is used."
The Blessed One said: "Just so, Subhiiti, the bodhisattva who would
speak thus: 'I will lead beings to final nirvana' - he is not to be called a
bodhisattva. And why is that? Is there, Subhuti, some thing which is
named 'bodhisattva'?"
He said: "No indeed, Blessed One."
The Blessed One said: "On that account the Tathagata says 'all
things are without living being, without personal soul, without person.'
Subhuti, a bodhisattva who would speak thus: 'I will bring about wonderful
arrangements in [my] sphere of activity'14-he too is not to be called
a bodhisattva.15 And why is that? 'Wonderful arrangements in [one's]
sphere of activity, wonderful arrangements in [one's] sphere of activity',
Subhuti, those have been said by the Tathagata not to be wonderful
arrangements. In that sense 'wonderful arrangements in [one's] sphere
of activity' is used. Subhuti, that bodhisattva who is intent on saying
'without a self are things, without a self are things'-he is declared 'a
bodhisattva, a bodhisattva' by the Tathagata, Arhat, Fully and Perfectly
Awakened One.
"What do you think, Subhuti? Does the physical eye of the Tathagata
exist?"
He said: "So it is Blessed One. The physical eye of the Tathiigata
exists."
The Blessed One said: "What do you think, Subhuti? Does the
divine eye of the Tathagata exist, the eye of wisdom, the eye of Dharma,
the awakened eye?"
He said: "So it is Blessed One. [9a] The divine eye of the Tathiigata,
the eye of wisdom, the eye of Dharma, the awakened eye exists."
The Blessed One said: "What do you think, Subhuti? There could be
as many Ganges rivers as there are sands in the river Ganges, and there
could be as many world systems as there are sands in that many rivers.
Would those world systems then be many?"16
l I
I
..I
The Gilgit Manuscript of the Vajracchedika 127
The Blessed One said: "Subhuti, I could know17 the various streams
of thought of living beings as numerous as those in that many world systems.
And why is that? 'Stream of thought, stream of thought', Subhuti,
that has been said by the Tathagata not to be a stream. In that sense
'stream of thought' is used. And why is that? Subhuti, a past thought is
not apprehended. A future thought is not apprehended. A present
(thought) 18 is not apprehended.
"What do you think, Subhuti? He who, after having filled this three
thousand great-thousand world system with the seven precious things,
would give it as a gift-surely that son or daughter of good family would,
as a result, produce much merit?"
He said: "Much, Blessed One, much, Sugata."
The Blessed One said: "So it is, Subhuti, so it is much. That son or
daughter of good family would, as a result, produce much merit. If,
Subhuti, there would have been a quantity of merit, the Tathagata would
not have said 'quantity of merit, quantity of merit'.
"What do you think, Subhuti? Should the Tathagata be seen
through the perfect development of his physical body?" [9b]
He said: "No Blessed One. It is not through the perfect development
of his physical body that the Tathagata is to be seen. And why is that?
'A perfect development of the physical body, a perfect development of
the physical body', that is said to be not a perfect development by the
Tathagata. In that sense 'perfect development of the physical body' is
used."
The Blessed One said: "What do you think, Subhuti? Should the
Tathagata be seen through the possession of characteristic marks?"
He said: "No Blessed One. It is not through the possession of characteristic
marks that the Tathagata is to be seen. And why is that?
That which is the possession of characteristic marks is said to be not the
possession of characteristic marks by the Tathagata. In that sense 'possession
of characteristic marks' is used."
The Blessed One said: "What do you think, Subhuti? Surely it
Occurs to the Tathagata: 'Not by me has a Doctrine been taught.' He,
Subhuti, who would speak thus: 'By the Tathagata a Doctrine has been
taught,' he, Subhuti, would falsely accuse me by taking something up
from what is not there,19 Why is that? 'A teaching of Doctrine, a teaching
of Doctrine', Subhuti, that is not some thing which receives the name
'a teaching of Doctrine.'"
He said: "Blessed One, will there be any living beings at a future time
who, after hearing such Doctrines being taught, will believe?"
The Blessed One said: "They, Subhuti, are neither living beings nor
nonliving beings. Why is that? 'All living beings', Subhuti, they are said
128 Translation
to be not living beings by the Tathagata. In that sense [lOa] 'all living
beings' is used.
"What do you think, Subhuti? Surely that which was awakened to
by the Tathagata as the utmost, full and perfect awakening is some
thing?"
He said: "Blessed One, that which was awakened to by the Tathagata
as the utmost, full and perfect awakening is not some thing."
The Blessed One said: "So it is, Subhuti, so it is. Not even the most
minute thing exists or is found there. In that sense 'utmost, full and perfect
awakening' is used. But again, Subhuti, that thing is the same; there
is no difference. In that sense 'utmost, full and perfect awakening' is
used. Through the fact of there being no personal soul, no living being,
no person, that utmost, full and perfect awakening is fully and perfectly
awakened to as identical with all meritorious things. 'Meritorious
things, meritorious things', Subhuti-but just those are said by the
Tathagata not to be things. In that sense 'meritorious things' is used.
"But once again, Subhuti, if someone, after collecting piles of the
seven precious things as large as the kings of mountains, the Sumerus,
here in this three thousand great-thousand world system, were to give
them as a gift; and someone else, after having taken from this Perfection
of Wisdom a verse of even four lines, were to teach it to others-Subhuti,
the quantity of merit from the former case does not approach a
hundredth part of the quantity of merit of the latter ... [lOb] it is not
open to comparison.
"What do you think, Subhuti? Surely it occurs to the Tathagata:
'living beings are released by me.' Not, again, Subhuti, is it to be seen
thus. Why is that? That which is released by the Tathagata is not some
living being. If again, Subhuti, there would have been some living being
who was released by the Tathagata, that indeed would have been for him
the holding on to a self, the holding on to a living being, the holding on to
a personal soul, the holding on to a personal entity. 'Holding on to a
self, Subhuti, this is said by the Tathagata to be not holding on, but it is
held on to by simple ordinary people. 'Simple ordinary people', Subhuti,
these are said by the Tathagata not to be people. In that sense 'simple
ordinary people' is used.
"What do you think, Subhuti, should the Tathagata be seen through
the possession of characteristic marks?"
He said: "That is so, Blessed One. The Tathagata is to be seen
through the possession of characteristic marks."
The Blessed One said: "But if, Subhuti, the Tathagata were to be
seen through the possession of characteristic marks, a wheel-turning
king would also be a Tathagata."
l
L
The Gilgit Manuscript of the Vajracchedika 129
He said: "As I understand the meaning of what was said by the
Blessed One, the Tathagata is not to be seen through the possession of
characteristic marks."
Then, again, on that occasion the Blessed One spoke these verses:
Those who saw me through form,
Those who associated me with sound-[lIa]
They have engaged in a misguided effort.
Those people will not see me.
The Awakened One is to be seen from the Doctrine;
The Tathiigata is the body of Doctrine;
But, indeed, the substance of the Doctrine is not
to be understood;
Nor is it possible for it to be understood.
"What do you think, Subhuti? Is the utmost, full and perfect awakening
fully and perfectly awakened to by the Tathagata through the possession
of characteristic marks? Again, Subhuti, it is not to be seen thus.
The utmost, full and perfect awakening, Subhuti, is not fully and perfectly
awakened to by the Tathagata through the possession of characteristic
marks.
"If, again, Subhuti, it should occur thus: 'by someone set out on the
way of a bodhisattva the destruction of some thing is taught, or its annihilation,'
again, Subhuti, it is not to be seen thus. The destruction of
some thing, or its annihilation, is not taught by someone who has set out
on the way of a bodhisattva.
"If, again, Subhuti, a son or daughter of good family, after filling
world systems similar in number to the sands of the Ganges with the
seven precious things, were to give them as a gift to the Tathagata,
Arhat, Fully and Perfectly Awakened One; and if a bodhisattva were to
achieve composure20 in the midst of things that have no self-the latter
would indeed produce much greater merit than the former. However,
Subhuti, a quantity of merit is not to be acquired by a bodhisattva."
He said: "A quantity of merit, Blessed One, is to be acquired,
surely?"
The Blessed One said: "'Is to be acquired', Subhuti, not 'is to be held
on to'. In that sense 'is to be acquired' is used. [lIb]
"But once again, Subhuti, if someone were to speak thus: 'The
Tathagata goes, or he comes, or he stands, or he sits, or he lays down'-
he does not understand the meaning of what I said. Why is that? A
'Tathagata', Subhuti, has not come from anywhere, has not gone
130 Translation
anywhere. In that sense 'Tathiigata, Arhat, Fully and Perfectly
Awakened One' is used.
"And if again, Subhflti, a son or daughter of good family were to
grind into powder as many world systems as there are particles of dust in
this three thousand great-thousand world system so that there would be
just a pile of the finest atoms-what do think, Subhflti? Would that pile
of atoms be huge?"
He said: "That is so, Blessed One, that would be a huge pile of atoms.
And why is that? If, Blessed One, there would have been a pile, the
Blessed One would not have said 'a pile of atoms'. Why is that? That
which is said to be a pile of atoms, that is said by the Blessed One not to
be a pile. In that sense 'a pile of atoms' is used. That which the Tathagata
calls 'three thousand great-thousand world system', that is said by
the Tathagata not to be a system. In that sense 'three thousand greatthousand
world system' is used. Why is that? If, Blessed One, there
would have been a system, just that, Blessed One, would have been the
holding on to a solid mass. And that which is said by the Tathiigata
[12a] to be the holding on to a solid mass is said to be not holding on. In
that sense 'holding on to a solid mass' is used."
The Blessed One said: "And holding on to a solid mass is itself,
Subhflti, a thing not open to verbal expression; it cannot be put into
words. It, however, has been held on to by simple ordinary people. Why
is that? If, Subhflti, someone were to speak thus 'A view of a self was
taught by the Tathagata, a view of a living being, a view of a personal
soul, a view of a person' -would he indeed, Subhflti, speak correctly?"
He said: "No, Blessed One. And why is that? Blessed One, that
which is said by the Tathiigata to be a view of a self, that is said by the
Tathagata to be not a view. In that sense 'a view of a self is used."
The Blessed One said: "In this way, Subhflti, one who has set out on
the way of a bodhisattva should know all things, should be intent on
them. And he should be intent on them in such a way that even the conception
of a thing would not be present. Why is that? 'Conception of a
thing, conception of a thing', Subhflti, that is said by the Tathiigata not
to be a conception. In that sense 'conception of a thing' is used.
"And again, Subhflti, if a bodhisattva, mahasattva, having filled
immeasurable, incalculable world systems with the seven precious
things, were to give them as a gift; and if a son or daughter of good
family, having taken up from this Perfection of Wisdom a verse of even
four lines, were to preserve it, were to teach it, were to master it [12b]-
the latter certainly would produce immeasurable, incalculable merit,
much greater than the first.
l j
I ,
The Gilgit Manuscript of the Vajracchedika 131
"And how would he fully cause it to appear? In such a way that he
would not cause it to appear. In that sense 'fully cause it to appear' is
used."
A shooting star, a fault of vision, a lamp;
An illusion and dew and a bubble;
A dream, a flash of lightning, a thunder cloud-
In this way is the conditioned to be seen.
The Blessed One said this.
Delighted, the Elder Subhiiti, and the monks and nuns, the lay men
and women, and the world with its devas, men, asuras and gandharvas
rejoiced in that spoken by the Blessed One.
The Vajracchedika Prajfiaparamita is concluded.